Talk-20260119_130557 - Meeting Transcript (Anonymized)
19 January 2026, 12:05pm | Duration: 28m 54s

Notes: Personal names in the transcript have been anonymized. Speaker names are replaced with "Participant A" and "Participant B". The transcript was automatically generated by Microsoft Teams during the interview.

Participant A started transcription
Participant B   0:03
To have that framework as a useful proxy would be, for example, thinking through the process as we did it, right? So we map the sources. What’s the scope of the governing knowledge? Then how do we classify — you know — what are the ambiguous terms? It’s just the process we made together. How do we trace it? Where’s the gap in knowledge scoping? And I think the most important part for me would have been, as you put in the paper, that it’s semi-automated, right?
It’s like: what are the accountability and also institutional checks that have to be in there when we translate the provisions to computational processes and stuff. So where is that decision taken as to what is ambiguous as well, and how we disambiguate it.
Participant A   1:04
Yeah, you know what — I was thinking something. There’s a study that classifies ambiguity. But the thing is that, from a philosophical perspective, ambiguity can be anything. So any word can be considered ambiguous. So I don’t know if we should provide, let’s say, an interpretative—
Participant B   1:14
I… yeah.
Statement.
Participant A   1:24
—idea of how to translate all the requirements into something like a goal model.
Participant B   1:29
No, so my conclusion from looking at ambiguity is that you guys are having a really different perspective on it — to the point that we would never really use it the same way in law. So I would just say that, to do it right…
And I also looked at [Scholar 1]’s classification and all of that — it’s interesting and it’s addressing the linguistic part of it. But the ambiguity that we feature as a system, rather than a book, in the legal profession is not about…
It’s an art in a way, right? Even if we look at semantic interpretation, literal interpretation — we do have courts with institutional power to do that. So classification schemes and where ambiguity happens are not really translatable in legal practice.
And the only way of doing it — other than avoiding it, you know, other than using simple, straightforward cases that you can easily do in a very well-scoped journal — is figuring out at which point a human has to be in there.
And I would say it’s mostly about the process of translating. First you identify together, and then you can kind of… even classification of easy cases requires a legal expert or a domain expert.
And then automation could happen, and then you can have validity and you can check and whatever. But you wouldn’t know things you don’t know.
Participant A   2:57
Hmm.
Participant B   3:08
So in that sense, you wouldn’t know that something is ambiguous because the term itself, as we discussed, doesn’t really sound like a typical suspect, right? Like arrival wouldn’t sound to me — or delay wouldn’t sound to me — like reasonable, so…
Participant A   3:08
Yeah.
Participant B   3:25
I think the value I see is in this process of dissecting and checking whether the requirements have this nature — ambiguity or not — together.
But then I was also thinking about understandable and actionable. I tend to relate a bit more with goal models because especially when you have different contours, it’s a bit more visual. I think for a legal brain you’re more familiar with visualisation than when it’s like “PP kick **”. When it’s like a process model, it’s more difficult; when you do mapping, it’s easier — especially when you do it together — and then I’m like: what happened to this and that?
So I see the value in added visualisation. And what I think is important — it might not be there, but I think it’s really important — is where that non-compliance happens, because you have this heuristic, right? So remember you have this “when” and “if this fits that” or blah blah blah.
Participant A   4:43
Yeah, yeah — not the decomposition of the…
Participant B   4:48
Yeah, because it’s really important where that is deemed to be non-compliant and why. So documenting — having this threshold explicitly articulated — when it goes to “when you haven’t achieved this, it’s meant non-compliant.” Because non-compliance is also a business decision, as we talked about: you have to look at what law is, what decision is organisationally, and then you take risks into account and all of that. So basically articulating more of the threshold of non-compliance would be easier for legal brains.
And what happens is: I really like this evidence that we discussed, right? Some of this could be easily fetched — logs, arrival, documentation that you can easily pull out — and in those easy cases this is great. But what’s difficult is those difficult cases where the evidence and assessment are tied to explainability.
Participant A   5:23
Yeah.
Participant B   5:40
Because it’s important to substantiate, because those cases often produce further legal actions. And at that point you have a discovery process, and then you have to recover evidence: how did you decide and why did you decide that? And if you reject someone, you often have a test in administrative law in many processes — you have this duty to explain. So I think…
Participant A   6:23
I was wondering — you know that we discovered that, at least for now, there is a non-exhaustive list of extraordinary circumstances we enforce in the use case we included in the paper. Basically one of the tasks is like—
Participant B   6:33
Mm-hmm.
Participant A   6:40
—evidence: no matter what, if there is an extraordinary circumstance or not, you need to register that criteria. But of course there is not a fixed list we could include, like a drop-down. It’s also: how meaningful are the inputs that we are receiving? Because we can provide certain parameters, or guidelines, to people to put their criteria, but as you mentioned, the evidence is tied to the explainability of that evidence. But we cannot necessarily enforce that the evidence we are collecting is actually meaningful.
Participant B   7:18
Yeah. I mean, in a way then it’s also a decision of erring on the side of excessive collection sometimes, right? Because it’s unclear. And you had that example where at some point they classified the sickness of a pilot as extraordinary and then reassessed it.
I think the general policy consideration would be to collect more rather than less. And the rationale behind it is that most probably the costs of substantiating or explaining the rejection or whatever outcome would justify collecting evidence on the front end.
So that could be explained: why it is important — not knowing exactly what kind of evidence is needed — to discuss what could possibly be collected.
Participant A   8:18
OK.
Participant B   8:18
Right. I mean, it’s not like it’s the end of the universe that you don’t know where it’s coming from, right? You still have reasonable inferences: is it the weather? I mean we were stuck in Amsterdam in weather conditions — five centimetres of snow — but it was weather. Oftentimes you can pinpoint.
Participant A   8:51
Yeah, yeah.
Participant B   8:52
So it could be done to some extent anyways. And connected to that: if we think about explainability, it’s always good to have an idea — what did I put? Evidence sources, decisions on interpretive choices. So basically documenting the analytical steps required to ease the explainability on the other end.
Still, if we’re thinking about assessment in those cases of ambiguity, when it’s extraordinary circumstances, you still would have a qualification choice, right? In easy cases it’s easier. In complicated cases, you would probably need to embed more consultation or checking — I don’t know — but there are clear differences. I just don’t know how to articulate it in a way that is usable.
And then I had another thing: what I find important is when and if that changes. And this has been under review for over 10 years, right?
Participant A   10:19
Really?
Participant B   10:28
I think it’s still tabled. I think there was, at the end of the year, some kind of little movement. Obviously there’s a lot of lobbying going on and you never know when that actual change will happen. But how do you keep track — and when it’s a different version — when things are changing? How do you rationalise that? I don’t know. I just put it as a question.
And yeah, that’s probably what I had from before: why something should be treated as compliant — but that’s connected to thresholds and proxies. If this and this are satisfied, then it is compliant. So more emphasis on how do you treat compliance as a threshold.
Participant A   11:25
Compliance — I mean, I would like to have a clear understanding of that part, and yes, of course…
Participant B   11:31
Wait, I’m gonna get my video off and start getting ready. OK, talk to me.
Participant A   11:35
So my question is: when you talk about this compliance threshold, we can have two different approaches now: one more quantitative and the other qualitative, right? With goal models, they don’t include any numbers, so we don’t have the numeric perspective — but we have the qualitative perspective based on how many of those tasks and goals have been satisfied, yes/no, as a binary outcome.
Participant B   12:07
OK, but… I remember you had this weak and strong compliance mentioned, but I don’t remember how it was developed into what. I do remember you had some characteristics that something could be considered strong compliance if and when. Didn’t you have that in one of it? Could be a previous version, but I don’t remember that.
Participant A   12:31
Yes, we have that, but that criteria is not necessarily aligned with the legal perspective — because we are saying strong compliance with the process model, but not with the law.
Participant B   12:40
Yeah. No. Exactly.
Participant A   12:51
Because the key point here, as you mentioned, is how we can guarantee that the goal model represents the legal perspective. And to do that we need to involve a lawyer from the design of the process.
Participant B   12:52
Yeah.
Participant A   13:06
And now, the strong and weak compliance is not strong/weak compliance with the law. We’re talking about compliance just from an operational perspective.
Participant B   13:10
Yeah. OK.
Participant A   13:24
So it’s like: this process model is compliant with the goal model if it satisfies all the elements always; and weak compliance is if there is just one path that does that. Maybe we should add a clarification of it.
Participant B   13:25
Yeah. Wait — you just dropped out for a second. I think what you were saying is important.
So making it more explicit when you describe the goal model — I think you do say we take an organisational perspective — but maybe emphasise that the organisational perspective would have a particular take on what legal compliance is, because we take stakeholders’ ideas on what compliance is, or something. The issue with compliance is it depends on the side of the actor. I don’t know.
Tell me more about this “weak compliance” again.
Participant A   14:44
Yeah, OK, I got it. I would include it. And the other question I have — probably not in the questionnaire — is about tools. I know we talked a lot that many of those decisions are taken case by case and you need to analyse everything manually. But I don’t know if there are tools you use on a daily basis where this kind of approach—
Participant B   14:59
Yeah. OK.
Participant A   15:18
—could fit. Or maybe not the whole approach, but I mean the visualisation of the goal models could help you understand something.
Participant B   15:20
Wait. I think what is important, as I said, is—
Participant A   15:51
I lost your audio. I lost you when you were talking about “I think it’s important, as I said…”
Participant B   17:39
Sorry — I accepted the Wi-Fi and realised Teams didn’t work on my mobile. So what I was thinking: in real life, all of these cancellations and compensations are taken on a massive scale. When we were stuck in Amsterdam, there were close to a million people affected.
So the real value in automation, like in many other areas, would be that it provides a cost-effective framework. This classification into what kind of compensation regimes or what kind of duty is on a carrier is already important, because even though we, as purists, insist on manual review, in principle you cannot have the manpower to handle a million passengers’ claims.
So the value is classifying different cases and flagging those cases that need extra attention.
Participant A   18:51
Hmm.
Participant B   18:52
And also documenting those grey cases. Even in terms of mapping the workload and taking care of easy cases, that is immense value.
Because we’re also talking about conceptual classification — extraordinary circumstances as an abstract thing. But in reality, when extraordinary things happen, they affect a huge number of people. So in a way, when it’s an extraordinary situation leading to a certain compensation regime — for example, severe weather conditions — then it becomes less extraordinary, in a sense. It’s not unforeseeable when it affects a lot of people.
And as you live through that sixth day of cancellation, it becomes more predictable. And at some point this classification could help you direct those cases you would put as difficult. So it’s almost like: in a dynamic situation where flights are continuously cancelled, you have the extraordinary situation becoming more of an easy case.
Participant A   20:03
Mm-hmm. Yeah, I got it. So—
Participant B   20:11
You can say it’s foreseeable. It’s the same factual patterns you need to apply for four/three whatever days that are affected. So it’s also an interesting point: changing the nature of ambiguous terms when they become more of an ordinary meaning.
Participant A   20:21
So basically, like having our own repository of case law in that sense — to some extent — because if you already have a specific scenario, and as you mentioned, you were able to identify those extraordinary circumstances patterns in what had happened, then now you have an idea of how to manage future cases.
Participant B   20:59
Yeah, and in a way it’s also case-law-based reasoning, right? You can deduct a pattern and say: most probable it will be the same regime — so you can extract patterns from there.
Participant A   21:25
OK. And I would like to ask briefly: what part of the approach do you think is the weak part — our biggest weakness? In the sense that maybe you’re concerned this approach is not considering all the circumstances relevant for making legal decisions.
Participant B   21:46
To me, it’s almost impossible to construct that without engagement with case law. That’s what I’m afraid of being missed — because it’s not sufficient just to look at the provision of a regulation. So it’s this mapping of the knowledge base.
I think that’s really important. And once you’ve done it right, it’s easier to do it with less support from a domain expert — because you run it and adjust and change — but the fact is you wouldn’t know some things because it’s a whole body of case law or decisions or guidelines. That part is really important. It’s more important than just saying “it’s ambiguous,” because it’s a matter of qualification.
Participant A   23:18
Yeah, I got it. So it’s related to the mapping. And specifically goal modelling in general — because operationalisation of the law is usually done by companies, not necessarily aligned. So maybe we should add something like: legal experts and the process should consider case law information to do the mapping based on that. Although I’m not sure we can provide guidelines to do that because it’s so extensive.
Participant B   24:14
Yeah, that’s the thing. You basically need someone to tell you what that is, so you can work on it. But what you could do with modelling is: you can see where and how. And that input makes you inquire certain information — “how do I know?” — so there’s a lot of analytical value.
Participant A   24:32
Yeah. I got it. Do you have any others?
Participant B   24:49
The good thing about goal modelling, the way I understand it, is that you can make it from perspectives of different stakeholders, right?
Participant A   24:52
Yes, we can.
Participant B   25:04
So maybe you can map it from the perspective of a regulator, or a company, or a regulator and affected person, or a company and affected person. If you can model different perspectives, then you can see the gaps, and reason about decisions taken.
It’s good for explainability and business cases, because it makes it clear: when you take a decision, it costs you this and that. When companies and individuals are on opposite sides — affected passenger versus company — they have different incentives and costs. So extending the goal model and presenting different stakeholder perspectives could show where the gap is, and how big the gap is — if it could be quantified.
Participant A   26:32
Interesting — maybe future work, but I see the value.
Participant B   26:37
Yeah. I don’t know what’s possible, but that’s for you to think — maybe that’s paper 2027. But that’s what’s interesting about the goal model.
Participant A   26:52
OK, perfect. I will use the transcript. If you have any questions or comments during the week, let me know and I will integrate them as soon as possible.
Participant B   27:00
Yeah.
Participant A   27:09
Thank you very much for your time today.
Participant B   27:25
Yeah.
Participant A stopped transcription
